we often hear that studying literature
involves finding a deeper meaning to a
text when writing about literary works
were expected to mentally dive below the
surface in order to come back up with
big ideas but you may find yourself
looking at the flat page of a book
wondering how deep it can really go how
do we reach those ideas that turn into
great essays well there are two crucial
thinking steps that can lead us in the
right direction
practicing insight and acknowledging
complexity insight is the ability to
arrive at an intuitive understanding of
a big idea using only small clues to get
there if you're practicing insight
you'll be able to use observations about
character behavior to figure out their
true emotions and motivations pay
attention to little things because they
add up to what is really meaningful for
example if you consider a character like
mr. Darcy from Pride and Prejudice who
openly declares his dislike for miss
Lizzie Bennet you might at first assume
he's just a mean guy but using your
powers of insight you're noticing other
smaller things how Darcy's eyes linger
on Lizzie's face and how he seems all
flustered when she's around add to the
mixture knowledge that mr. Darcy is in a
much higher social class than Lizzie and
your sense of insight should be telling
you that there's something more here in
this case it will tell you that Darcy's
surface behavior is in conflict with his
true feelings of attraction because the
difference in wealth between himself and
Lizzie makes him feel that it'll never
work
thinking about all those small clues
gives us insight about some of the big
abstract ideas within the novel that we
can approach in an essay appearances
versus reality the power of wealth and
social stratification and the
unpredictable nature of love and
attraction look at that deeper meaning
the second step to a sophisticated
analysis is acknowledging complexity
let's face it in both life and
literature situations are complicated
due to social forces like relationships
moral codes personal desires and power
structures this means that there are at
any given time multiple factors that
shape what is true in order to
acknowledge complexity in your writing
refrain from making broad
generalizations about a text or
establishing quick simple judgments
about a character explore
facet of your subject carefully and make
sure to consider multiple influences on
events explain the tension of multiple
forces that create the story for example
a basic analysis of Toni Morrison's
beloved where the protagonist has killed
her own child rather than allow her to
grow up in slavery might sound like this
Seth emerged her own daughter this act
was wrong and causes the ghost of the
child to haunt her throughout the novel
these observations are simplistic they
don't acknowledge all the different
forces that contribute to what the
character has done try something like
this instead a culture of slavery
disturbs the ability to determine what
is morally right set those past
experiences with violence reinforce the
fear she has for her child's fate and
transform the murder into a protective
act as the novel progresses Sathya is
haunted both by the angry spirit of her
daughter and by the memories of
everything else slavery took from her
here we see those influential forces at
work and we've shown off our ability to
understand the complicated nature of the
human experience which again allows us
to access those big ideas that reveal
the deeper meaning of a story ideas in
this case like the parameters of
maternal instinct the consequences of
injustice and the question of whether or
not ethics can even exist in a corrupted
moral system it's impossible to sit down
and write an amazing essay about
literature without first thinking about
it before you hit the keys go back to
the text and fish out the small moments
the complicated moments in the story
line them up in your mind practice
insight acknowledge complexity arrive at
some big ideas before you know it the
deeper meaning will be close at hand
you